Intoduction to SuperDarn


Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) data is a powerful tool for space science
research. 
Traditionally this data has been processed using a routine with known limitations.


A large issue preventing the development and implementation of new processing algorithms
was the lack of a realistic test dataset. We have implemented a robust data simulator based
on physical principles which is The simulator is able to generate
SuperDARN data with realistic statistical fluctuations and known input Doppler velocity
and spectral width. 

Using the simulator to generate a test data set, we was able to test new
algorithms for processing SuperDARN data. The algorithms which were tested included
the traditional method (FITACF), a new approach using the bisection method (FITEX2),
and the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for nonlinear curve fitting (LMFIT). FITACF is
found to have problems when processing data with high (> 1 km/s) Doppler velocity, and
is outperformed by both FITEX2 and LMFIT. LMFIT is found to produce slightly better
fitting results than FITEX2, and is thus my recommendation to be the standard SuperDARN
data fitting algorithm.



The construction of the new midlatitude SuperDARN chain has revealed that nighttime,
quiet-time plasma irregularities with low Doppler velocity and spectral width are a very
common (> 50% of nights) occurrence. Following on previous work, we have conducted
a study of nighttime midlatitude convection using SuperDARN data. First, the data are
processed into convection patterns, and the results are presented. The drifts are mainly
zonal and westward throughout the night. The plasma drifts also display significant seasonal
variability. Additionally, a large latitudinal gradient is observed in the zonal velocity during
the winter months. This is attributed to processes in the conjugate hemisphere, and possible
causes are discussed.




During my graduate studies, we have been part of the development of a software package for
enabling and accelerating space science research known as DaViTpy. This software package
is completely free and open source. It allows access to several different space science datasets
through a single simple interface, without having to write any code for reading data files.
It also incorporates several space science models in a single install. The software package
represents a paradigm shift in the space science community.


